GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS
Bear Pen Gap - "Hunting trips account for many names. Turkeypen Ridge and Bear Pen Gap took theirs from baited log pens used in trapping." [1]

Bible Creek - "Parson Bald, according to one account noted by Mr. Fink, was originally a place for outdoor "preachin,'" where a parson would hold forth. Two streams running down its flanks are called, through association, Bible Creek and Testament Branch." [1]

Blanket Mountain - "Indian Commissioner Return J. Meigs once got "lost" while running a survey line. As a target for his compas sightings, he had a brightly-colored blanket hung froma a high pole on the top of a mountain, now Blanket Mountain." [1] 

Bote Mountain - "Bote Mountain got its name while a road was being built from Cades Cove to Spence Field. Part of the builders were Cherokees. A poll was taken to see of which two ridges the road would follow. Each Indian would point to the same ridge, saying "Bote," meaning "vote," since the Cherokee language has no "V" sound.  The other mountain became known as Defeat Ridge." [1]

Boulevard, The - "Elsewhere on Le Conte was a razor-edge route to the top, also choked with mountain growth. An early explorer tried repeatedly to get through but never made it. He always called the route "that damned boulevard."  A well-kept, graded trail today, it is still called "The Boulevard." [1]

Cammerer, Mount - "White rock is "a misnomer, for its color came from light gray lichens rather than stone." (It is now called Mount Cammerer, for Arno B. Cammerer, former director of the National Park Service who helped establish Smokey Park.)" [1]

Charlies Bunion - "Charlies Bunion, a popular hikers' goal, was named from a chance remark. The late Horace Kephart, explorer and author, climbed the pinnacle to see what a recent cloudburst had done it. In his party was Charlie Conner, a native of Lufty Valley who had a bothersome bunion. On approaching the top, only a sheer rock point was visible. "That sticks out like Charlie's Bunion!" one of the party exclaimed." [1]

Chimney Tops - "One of the most familiar Smoky landmarks is The Chimneys, twin pinnacles readily seen from the trans-mountain highway, U.S. 441. Mountain men called any tall rock spire a cliff or chimney. (The Cherokee knew the Chimneys as Duniskwalguni, "forked antlers.")

Curry He Mountain - "The Cherokee Indians used a green plant they called "gura" in a spring salad. Showing a white settler around the area one day, a Cherokee pointed to a place where gura grew and said, "Gura-hi," meaning "gura is there." The white man thought he said "Curry He" and meant the whole mountain." [1]

Curry She Mountain - "The fair sex wasn't to be slighted, so a near-by mountain was named Curry She." [1]

Defeat Ridge - "Bote Mountain got its name while a road was being built from Cades Cove to Spence Field. Part of the builders were Cherokees. A poll was taken to see of which two ridges the road would follow. Each Indian would point to the same ridge, saying "Bote," meaning "vote," since the Cherokee language has no "V" sound.  The other mountain became known as Defeat Ridge." [1]

Fittified Spring - "There's an intermittent spring on Le Conte, with alternate periods of ebb and flow. The mountaineers named it Fittified Spring." "Fittified" was their for a person subject to fits and seizures." [1]

Huggins Hell - "Well, the mountain people called any vast tangle of laurel or rhododendron a "hell," and there was this fellow named Huggins. Huggins vowed he'd explore one of these obstinate tangles on the slopes of Mt. Le Conte "if it takes me to Hell." Huggins was never heard from again "and popularly was supposed to have carried out the alternative" [1]

Le Conte, Mount - "The lofty mountain was named for Joseph Le Conte, a geologist who did some studies years ago on the North Carolina side of the Smokies.  According to Mr. Fink, there's no evidence Le Conte ever so much as saw the grand Tennessee mountain. Prof. S. B. Buckley, a naturalist, named the peak." [1]

Long Hungry Ridge - "'On one occaision a party of bear hunters were marooned for days by bad weather and high water. Their rations were nearly exhausted and they were nearly starved when they finally reached home.' Their stand has been known ever since as Long Hungry Ridge." [1]

Parson Bald - "Parson Bald, according to one account noted by Mr. Fink, was originally a place for outdoor "preachin,'" where a parson would hold forth. Two streams running down its flanks are called, through association, Bible Creek and Testament Branch." [1]

Pigeon River - "Paralleling the highway [US 441] is a roaring stream. During the early parts of the 19th century, when the now-extinct passenger pigeon often darkened the sky from sheer numbers, trees along the stream were a favorite roosting place. Early accounts tell of such numbers that limbs broke from their weight. The stream is west prong of Little Pigeon River." [1]

Scratch Britches - "Scratch Britches is the name of a briar covered ridge." [1]

Sugarlands - "The highway [US 441] runs through a valley where hardwood trees make a brilliant display of color in the fall. Most of these trees are maples, the mountain man's "sugar tree," his only source of "sweetenin.'" Hence, the Sugarlands." [1]

Testament Branch - "Parson Bald, according to one account noted by Mr. Fink, was originally a place for outdoor "preachin,'" where a parson would hold forth. Two streams running down its flanks are called, through association, Bible Creek and Testament Branch." [1]

Trinkling Falls - ""Lacking just the word he needed, some poetically minded soul coined one to fittingly describe a small cascade trickling down over the rocks with a tinkling sound," Mr. Fink writes. The name: Trinkling Falls." [1]

Turkeypen Ridge - "Hunting trips account for many names. Turkeypen Ridge and Bear Pen Gap took theirs from baited log pens used in trapping." [1]

Turkey Fly Up Ridge - "Turkey Fly Up Ridge is named for a hunting incident." [1]





































[1] Dickey, David Dale. "Paul Fink Book Traces Colorful Smoky Names". Knoxville Sentinel, July 17, 1956, p. C2. https://www.newspapers.com/image/595825025

[2] "Mountain Names". Asheville Citizen, March 4, 1920, p. 8. https://www.newspapers.com/clip/82438505/mountain-names/

Mountain Names

The original settlers of the southern mountains were men and women of originality, resource and initiative, but though they exhibited these qualities on many occasions it must be confessed that they did not do when it came to naming our mountains.

No one is perfect, of course, and persons who were kept busily engaged in keeping the Indians' from lifting their scalps, and in laying by a little corn to supplement the supply of game, may well be excused from giving much time to the selection of names for mountain heights. Certainly they could not give to this nomenclature the diligent attention manifested by the bestower of names on Pullman cars. Therefore we have no Agamemnons, no Glenvarlochides, no Cyclamens, no Albatrosses, as names for our mountains, and thanks be, no Clarices.

Our ancestors took names which served, primitively descriptive, unmistakable in meaning. A mountain covered with undergrowth was called Big Brushy if it was large, and Little Brushy if small. There are Big Balds and Little Balds, and sometimes the name of some individual is prefixed, not for the sake of honoring this person but as a matter of description, such as Siler's Bald. Knobs were also designated as "big" or "little," as "stony" or "grassy," as "round" or "flat." No one could mis-take what these names meant, or that "Whitesides" meant a white faced height.

If our forefathers had been persons of leisure they would doubtless have created a commission for the naming of mountains, similar to that British commission which produces for warships such suggestive and often sonorous names as "Triumphant," "Magnificent," "Invincible," "Wasp" and "Kite." Then, doubtless we would have had a ransacking of Attic litter, Roman mythology and Hebrew literature for imposing names. Surely wo would have inherited a "Goliath," or a "Sampson" out of the lot, and so have had a more impressive name for a 6,500 foot mountain giant than somebody's "Knob."

The aforesaid ancestors seem to have had an aversion to using Indian names for the mountains. Possibly this was because of the prejudice they entertained against all Indians except dead ones. They adopted the Indian names for the rivers but balked apparently at making the mountains monuments for the Cherokees.

In their hasty apportionment of names to the mountains the early people ran out of names and often gave the same name to many peaks. There are plenty of "Big Balds" as well as little ones, and "Beaverdam" is a name found everywhere, as is "Rocky Knob" and "Firescald." It is this fact which has sometimes led to the reproach that our forefathers lacked originality in giving names. It was not lack of this but lack of time.

If one does not assent readily to this, consider some of these names which incidentally suggest also that the early bestowers of names were sometimes moved by a sense of humor. There is, for example, in Clay county a "Chunky Gal" mountain, thus honoring the memory of some unnamed maiden who was probably not slender. On the waters of one of the numerous "Indian creeks" is "No Business" mountain. The name tells a story in two words. There be many hereabouts who after scrambling through dense laurel to get somewhere, preferably back to where they came from, will heartily agree that there are some peaks where a man has no business to go.

And the same people will appreciate the humor which gave the name of "Bum Pass" to an alleged pass whose steepness and altitude make the traveler wish he had cut across the mountains instead of trying the "pass." Then there is "Hungry" mountain, also suggestive of past experiences. The origin of "Hanging Dog" in Cherokee county is in dispute, as are sometimes the elections returns from there. "Slick Rock" and "Short Off" are names which tell all there is to be said. There are also sundry "Defeats," the name being given to signify that someone essayed to cross such a mountain and failed. On the upper Tuckaseegee river one of these "Defeats" is named after a hound which was unable to penetrate the underbrush to the other side.










https://www.newspapers.com/image/?clipping_id=14013837&fcfToken=eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJmcmVlLXZpZXctaWQiOjE5OTc2MzAzNiwiaWF0IjoxNjIzMjczOTA4LCJleHAiOjE2MjMzNjAzMDh9.3PqxjNEGhMHMQMWICJtD-JmTyBH2uneweCHfEw5ihcw
